Alerting: Document Grafana 8 High Availability setup (#41503)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/alerting/unified-alerting/high-availability.md

+++
title = " Configure high availability"
description = "High Availability"
keywords = ["grafana", "alerting", "tutorials", "ha", "high availability"]
weight = 450
+++

# High availability

> The Grafana alerting systems has two main components, the `Scheduler` and the internal `Alertmanager`. The `Scheduler` is responsible for the evaluation of your [alert rules]({{< relref "./fundamentals/evaluate-grafana-alerts.md" >}}) while the internal Alertmanager takes care of the **routing** and **grouping**.

Reviewer: Did you mean `system` or `systems`?

```suggestion
The Grafana alerting system has two main components: a `Scheduler` and an internal `Alertmanager`. The `Scheduler` is responsible for the evaluation of your [alert rules]({{< relref "./fundamentals/evaluate-grafana-alerts.md" >}}) while the internal Alertmanager takes care of the **routing** and **grouping**.
```

> When it comes to a highly available setup, the operational mode of the scheduler is unaffected. All alerts will be evaluated in every instance. The operational change happens in the Alertmanager, it is in charge of also **deduplicating** the alert notifications between Grafana instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When it comes to running Grafana alerting in high availability the operational mode of the scheduler is unaffected such that all alerts continue be evaluated in each Grafana instance. Rather the operational change happens in the Alertmanager which *deduplicates** alert notifications across Grafana instances.
```

   `───'         │                        ││Scheduler│──────▶Alertmananager│─┼──┘    ┌──────────────────────┐
                 │      ┌───────────┐  ┌─▶│└─────────┘      ▲──────────────┤ │       │                      │
  .─────.        │      │   Load    │  │  │Grafana          │              │ │       │                      │
 ╱       ╲       │      │ Balancing │  │  └─────────────────┼──────────────┼─┘       │     Integrations     │
(  User   )──────┼─────▶│  Reverse  │──┤  ┌─────────────────┼──────────────┼─┐       │                      │
 `.     ,'       │      │   Proxy   │  │  │┌─────────┐      ├──────────────▼ │       │                      │
   `───'         │      └───────────┘  │  ││Scheduler│──────▶Alertmananager│─┼──┐    └──────────────────────┘
                 │                     └─▶│└─────────┘      └──────────────┘ │  │                ▲
  .─────.        │                        │Grafana                           │  │                │
 ╱       ╲       │                        └──────────────────────────────────┘  └────────────────┘
(  User   )──────┘
 `.     ,'
   `───'
```

> The coordination between Grafana instances happens via [Gossip](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gossip_protocol). Alerts are not gossiped between instances. It is expected that each scheduler delivers the same alerts to each Alertmanager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The coordination between Grafana instances happens via [a Gossip protocol](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gossip_protocol). Alerts are not gossiped between instances. It is expected that each scheduler delivers the same alerts to each Alertmanager.
```

The two types of messages that are gossiped between instances are:

- Notification logs: Who (which instance) notified what (which alert)
- Silences: If an alert should fire or not

> These two states are persisted in the database periodically and when Grafana is gracefully shutdown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both notifications and silences are persisted to the database periodically and during graceful shutdown of Grafana.
```

Author: I think I prefer my phrasing on this one. I've just enumerated the states and this is within the same section. The persistence happens within the database which is what I have referred to.

## Enable high availability

> To enable high availability support, you need to add at least 1 Grafana instance to the [`[ha_peer]` configuration option]({{<relref"../../administration/configuration.md#unified_alerting">}}) within the `[unified_alerting]` section:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable high availability support you need to add at least 1 Grafana instance to the [`[ha_peer]` configuration option]({{<relref"../../administration/configuration.md#unified_alerting">}}) within the `[unified_alerting]` section:
```

1. In your custom configuration file ($WORKING_DIR/conf/custom.ini), go to the `[unified_alerting]` section.
2. Set `[ha_peers]` to the set of hosts for each grafana instance in the cluster (using a format of host:port) e.g. `ha_peers=10.0.0.5:9094,10.0.0.6:9094,10.0.0.7:9094`

> 3. Communication occurs using port 9094 on both UDP and TCP, you need to make sure each instance has access on these.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Gossiping of notifications and silences uses both TCP and UDP port 9094. Each Grafana instance will need to be able to accept incoming connections on these ports.
```

+++

> title = "High Availability"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title = " Configure high availability"
```

description = "High Availability"
keywords = ["grafana", "alerting", "tutorials", "ha", "high availability"]
weight = 450
+++

> # High Availability - How does it work?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# High availability
```

> The Grafana alerting systems has two main components, the `Scheduler` and the internal `Alertmanager`. The `Scheduler` is responsible for the evaluation of your [alert rules]({{< relref "/fundamentals/evaluate-grafana-alerts.md" >}}) while the internal Alertmanager takes care of the **routing** and **grouping**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Grafana alerting systems has two main components, the `Scheduler` and the internal `Alertmanager`. The `Scheduler` is responsible for the evaluation of your [alert rules]({{< relref "./fundamentals/evaluate-grafana-alerts.md" >}}) while the internal Alertmanager takes care of the **routing** and **grouping**.
```

   `───'         │                        ││Scheduler│──────▶Alertmananager│─┼──┘    ┌──────────────────────┐
                 │      ┌───────────┐  ┌─▶│└─────────┘      ▲──────────────┤ │       │                      │
  .─────.        │      │   Load    │  │  │Grafana          │              │ │       │                      │
 ╱       ╲       │      │ Balancing │  │  └─────────────────┼──────────────┼─┘       │     Integrations     │
(  User   )──────┼─────▶│  Reverse  │──┤  ┌─────────────────┼──────────────┼─┐       │                      │
 `.     ,'       │      │   Proxy   │  │  │┌─────────┐      ├──────────────▼ │       │                      │
   `───'         │      └───────────┘  │  ││Scheduler│──────▶Alertmananager│─┼──┐    └──────────────────────┘
                 │                     └─▶│└─────────┘      └──────────────┘ │  │                ▲
  .─────.        │                        │Grafana                           │  │                │
 ╱       ╲       │                        └──────────────────────────────────┘  └────────────────┘
(  User   )──────┘
 `.     ,'
   `───'

> ```

Reviewer 3: I wonder if we can use [plant UML](https://plantuml.com/). It lets you write diagrams as a code.

Author: I've always used [mermaid](https://mermaid-js.github.io/mermaid-live-editor/edit/?gist=https://gist.github.com/sidharthv96/6268a23e673a533dcb198f241fd7012a#eyJjb2RlIjoiZ3JhcGggVERcbiAgICBBW1BhcnR5XSAtLT58R2V0IG1vbmV5fCBCKEdvIHNob3BwaW5nISEpXG4gICAgIiwibWVybWFpZCI6IntcbiAgXCJ0aGVtZVwiOiBcImZvcmVzdFwiLFxuICBcInRlc3RcIjogXCJoZWxsbyB3b3JsZFwiXG59IiwidXBkYXRlRWRpdG9yIjpmYWxzZSwiYXV0b1N5bmMiOnRydWUsInVwZGF0ZURpYWdyYW0iOnRydWUsImxvYWRlciI6eyJ0eXBlIjoiZ2lzdCIsImNvbmZpZyI6eyJ1cmwiOiJodHRwczovL2dpc3QuZ2l0aHViLmNvbS9zaWRoYXJ0aHY5Ni82MjY4YTIzZTY3M2E1MzNkY2IxOThmMjQxZmQ3MDEyYSJ9fX0) for that type of work. But now prefer these type of diagrams because they're just plain text.

Reviewer 3: For [example](http://www.plantuml.com/plantuml/uml/XP31QiCm38RlVWgHIqyzs0zGy2uXi45OoAqNprQJG6eLHnqTO-y-sOPkR8Vw9Ed__Nz8EwOBCC4RCTCPmfBGyq9HxLOySLRICityIr3ECoLenWtJre3RODJAq_b24ID3yqmkm9DRNVHBd8xn5T_5YD0dkdqqO0VebHerxDF-a4l5D27FcE1JHGe8RN8d5rrERhKCGTvF_k1d3DTLxA8F-ezgHU0N-JrLWws6GN27t7of_mppW64UCQfXC8LXCiCABzJEolXwX_TrxLRVAwFaUEjQZxj1qqN6ARdIbUjsDIwRkv9Mgcy0) 
![image](http://www.plantuml.com/plantuml/png/XP31QiCm38RlVWgHIqyzs0zGy2uXi45OoAqNprQJG6eLHnqTO-y-sOPkR8Vw9Ed__Nz8EwOBCC4RCTCPmfBGyq9HxLOySLRICityIr3ECoLenWtJre3RODJAq_b24ID3yqmkm9DRNVHBd8xn5T_5YD0dkdqqO0VebHerxDF-a4l5D27FcE1JHGe8RN8d5rrERhKCGTvF_k1d3DTLxA8F-ezgHU0N-JrLWws6GN27t7of_mppW64UCQfXC8LXCiCABzJEolXwX_TrxLRVAwFaUEjQZxj1qqN6ARdIbUjsDIwRkv9Mgcy0)

Author: Before this decision, I looked at https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/administration/set-up-for-high-availability/ and noticed we tend to do custom graphics for our documentation. 

So I opted out from doing something like the above and instead relied on something that's plain text. I have tagged someone from the docs team to let me know what's the best course of action.

But is very likely that I'll keep the plain text version if you don't mind 😄

The coordination between Grafana instances happens via [Gossip](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gossip_protocol). Alerts are not gossiped between instances. It is expected that each scheduler delivers the same alerts to each Alertmanager.

The two type of messages that are gossiped between instances are:

- Notification logs: Who (which instance) notifier what (which alert)
- Silences: If an alert should fire or not

> These two states are persisted to the database periodically and when Grafana is successfully shutdown.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These two states are persisted to the database periodically and when Grafana is gracefully shutdown.
```

> ## Setup

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Setup high availability
```

> To enable high availability support, we need to set the configuration [option `ha_peers` within the `[unified_alerting]` section]({{< relref "../../administration/configuration.md#unified_alerting" >}}). Setting this option to at least 1 peer will trigger the high availability mode for Grafana 8 Alerts. Communication happens using the port 9094 on both UDP and TCP, so please make sure each instance has access on these.

Reviewer 3: "we" sounds a bit strange in documentation.

Author: Thanks for spotting this! It's a mistake.

You're right. Technical documentation should be written in an imperative mood and "we" does not align with that.

> To enable high availability support, you need to set the configuration [option `ha_peers` within the `[unified_alerting]` section]({{< relref "../../administration/configuration.md#unified_alerting" >}}). Setting this option to at least 1 peer will trigger the high availability mode for Grafana 8 Alerts. Communication happens using port 9094 on both UDP and TCP, so please make sure each instance has access on these.
> 
> The idea here is that you:
> 
> - Set `ha_peers` to the set of hosts for each grafana instance in the cluster (using a format of `host:port`) e.g. `ha_peers=10.0.0.5:9094,10.0.0.6:9094,10.0.0.7:9094`
> - Set `ha_listen_address` to the instance (or the [Pod's](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/) IP (using a format of `host:port`) in the case of using Kubernetes) by default it is set to listen all interfaces (`0.0.0.0`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enable high availability support, you need to set the configuration option ha_peers within the [unified_alerting] section. Setting this option to at least 1 peer will trigger the high availability mode for Grafana 8 alerts. Any communication occurs using port 9094 on both UDP and TCP, so please make sure each instance has access to these.
- Set ha_peers to the set of hosts for each grafana instance in the cluster (using a format of host:port) e.g. ha_peers=10.0.0.5:9094,10.0.0.6:9094,10.0.0.7:9094
- Set ha_listen_address to the instance (or the Pod’s IP (using a format of host:port) in the case of using Kubernetes) by default, it is set to listen to all interfaces (0.0.0.0).
```

Reviewer 2: Will be good if you add a procedure format. Also, please update the "/administration/configuration/#unified_alerting" section with the `ha_peers` option.

Author: I like the format, but I don't think what you've suggested is correct. Let me give it another go. 

Also, HA peers is already part of this section (https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/main/docs/sources/administration/configuration.md#ha_peers) - or am I missing something?

Author: WDYT now?

Author: Let me know if you have any more comments and I can amend as part of a separate PR.

> - Set `ha_listen_address` to the instance (or the [Pod's](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/) IP (using a format of `host:port`) in the case of using Kubernetes) by default is it set to listen all interfaces (`0.0.0.0`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Set `ha_listen_address` to the instance (or the [Pod's](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/) IP (using a format of `host:port`) in the case of using Kubernetes) by default it is set to listen all interfaces (`0.0.0.0`).
```

## Kubernetes

> ### Grafana Pod IP

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> If using Kubernetes, you can expose the pod IP [through an environment variable](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/inject-data-application/environment-variable-expose-pod-information/) via the container definition such as:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are using Kubernetes, you can expose the pod IP [through an environment variable](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/inject-data-application/environment-variable-expose-pod-information/) via the container definition such as:
```
